Amara Dulcis some call it Mortal others Bitter-sweet some Woody Night-shade
and others Felon-wort. It grows up with woody stalks even to a man's height
and sometimes higher. The leaves fall off at the approach of winter and
spring out of the same stalk at spring-time. The branch is compassed about
with a whitish bark and has a pith in the middle of it. The main branch
branches itself into many small ones with claspers laying hold on what is
next to them as vines do. It bears many leaves they grow in no order at all.
The leaves are longish though somewhat broad and pointed at the ends. Many
of them have two little leaves growing at the end of their foot-stalk. Some
have but one and some none. The leaves are of a pale green colour the
flowers are of a purple colour or of a perfect blue like to violets and they
stand many of them together in knots. The berries are green at first but
when they are ripe they are very red if you taste them you shall find them
just as the crabs which we in Sussex call Bittersweet sweet at first and
bitter afterwards. They grow commonly almost throughout England especially
in moist and shady places. The leaves shoot out about the latter end of
March if the temperature of the air be ordinary it flowers in July and the
seeds are ripe soon after usually in the next month. It is under the planet
Mercury and a notable herb of his also if it be rightly gathered under his
influence. It is excellently good to remove witchcraft both in men and
beasts as also all sudden diseases whatsoever. Being tied round about the
neck is one of the most admirable remedies for the vertigo or dizziness in
the head and that is the reason the people in Germany commonly hang it
about their cattle's necks when they fear any such evil hath betided them.
Country people commonly take the berries of it and having bruised them
apply them to felons and thereby soon rid their fingers of such troublesome
guests. We have now showed you the external use of the herb we shall speak
a word or two of the internal and so conclude. Take notice it is a
Mercurial herb and therefore of very subtile parts as indeed all Mercurial
plants are therefore take a pound of the wood and leaves together bruise
the wood then put it in a pot and put to it three pints of white wine put
on the pot lid and shut it close and let it infuse hot over a gentle fire
twelve hours then strain it out so have you a most excellent drink to open
obstructions of the liver and spleen to help difficulty of breath bruises
and falls and congealed blood in any part of the body it helps the yellow
jaundice the dropsy and black jaundice and to cleanse women newly brought
to bed. You may drink a quarter of a pint of the infusion every morning. It
purges the body very gently and not churlishly as some hold.
It is called All-heal Hercules's All-heal and Hercules's Woundwort because
it is supposed that Hercules learned the herb and its virtues from Chiron
when he learned physic of him. Some call it Panay and others Opopane-wort.
Its root is long thick and exceeding full of juice of a hot and biting
taste the leaves are great and large and winged almost like ash-tree leaves
but that they are something hairy each leaf consisting of five or six pair
of such wings set one against the other upon foot-stalks broad below but
narrow towards the end one of the leaves is a little deeper at the bottom
than the other of a fair yellowish fresh green colour they are of a
bitterish taste being chewed in the mouth from among these rises up a stalk
green in colour round in form great and strong in magnitude five or six
feet in altitude with many joints and some leaves thereat towards the top
come forth umbels of small yellow flowers after which are passed away you
may find whitish yellow short flat seeds bitter also in taste. It is under
the dominion of Mars hot biting and choleric and remedies what evils Mars
inflicts the body of man with by sympathy as vipers flesh attracts poison
and the loadstone iron. It kills the worms helps the gout cramp and
convulsions provokes urine and helps all joint-aches. It helps all cold
griefs of the head the vertigo falling-sickness the lethargy the wind
cholic obstructions of the liver and spleen stone in the kidneys and
bladder.
Besides the common name it is called Orchanet and Spanish Bugloss and by
apothecaries Enchusa. It hath a great and thick root of a reddish colour
long narrow hairy leaves green like the leaves of Bugloss which lie very
thick upon the ground the stalks rise up compassed round about thick with
leaves which are less and narrower than the former they are tender and
slender the flowers are hollow small and of a reddish colour. It grows in
Kent near Rochester and in many places in the West Country both in
Devonshire and Cornwall. It is an herb under the dominion of Venus and
indeed one of her darlings though somewhat hard to come by. It helps old
ulcers hot inflammations burnings by common fire and St Anthony's fire by
antipathy to Mars. It helps the yellow jaundice spleen and gravel in the
kidneys. It stays the flux of the belly kills worms helps the fits of the
mother its decoction made in wine and drank strengthens the back and eases
the pains thereof it helps bruises and falls.
This herb has but one leaf which grows with the stalk a finger's length
above the ground being flat and of a fresh green colour broad like Water
Plantain but less without any rib in it from the bottom of which leaf rises
up one sometimes two or three slender stalks the upper half whereof is
somewhat bigger and dented with small dents of a yellowish green colour
like the tongue of an adder serpent. It grows in moist meadows and such
like places. It is an herb under the dominion of the Moon and Cancer and
therefore if the weakness of the retentive faculty be caused by an evil
influence of Saturn in any part of the body governed by the Moon it cures
it by sympathy. The juice of the leaves drank with the distilled water of
Horse-tail is a singular remedy for all manner of wounds in the breast
bowels or other parts of the body and is given with good success to those
that are troubled with casting vomiting or bleeding at the mouth or nose.
It helps sore eyes.
This has divers long leaves some greater some smaller set upon a stalk all
of them dented about the edges green above and greyish underneath and a
little hairy withal. Among which arises up usually but one strong round
hairy brown stalk two or three feet high with smaller leaves set here and
there upon it. At the top thereof grow many small yellow flowers one above
another in long spikes after which come rough heads of seed hanging
downwards which will cleave to and stick upon garments. It grows upon banks
near the sides of hedges. It is an herb under Jupiter and the sign Cancer
and strengthens those parts under the planet and sign and removes diseases
in them by sympathy. It is of a cleansing and cutting faculty without any
manifest heat moderately drying and binding. It opens and cleanses the
liver helps the jaundice and is very beneficial to the bowels healing all
inward wounds bruises hurts and other distempers. This herb also helps the
cholic cleanses the breast and rids away the cough.
It is called in some countries Water Hemp Bastard Hemp and Bastard
Agrimony because it strengthens the liver. The root continues a long time
having many long slender strings. The stalk grows up about two feet high
sometimes higher they are of a dark purple colour. The branches are many
growing at distances the one from the other. The leaves are fringed and
much indented at the edges. The flowers grow at the top of the branches of
a brown yellow colour spotted with black spots. It is a plant of Jupiter
as well as the other Agrimony only this belongs to the celestial sign
Cancer. It heals and dries cuts and cleanses thick and tough humours of the
breast. It helps the cachexia or evil disposition of the body the dropsy
and yellow jaundice. It opens obstructions of the liver mollifies the
hardness of the spleen being applied outwardly. It provokes urine and the
terms it kills worms and cleanses the body of sharp humours which are the
cause of itch and scabs.
Several counties give it different names so that there is scarcely any
herb growing of that bigness that has got so many it is called Cat's-foot
Ground-ivy Gill-go-by-ground and Gill-creep-by-ground Turn-hoof Haymaids
and Alehoof. This well known herb lies spreads and creeps upon the ground
shoots forth roots at the corners of tender jointed stalks set with two
round leaves at every joint somewhat hairy crumpled and unevenly dented
about the edges with round dents. It is commonly found under hedges and on
the sides of ditches under houses or in shadowed lanes. It is an herb of
Venus and therefore cures the diseases she causes by sympathy and those of
Mars by antipathy it is quick sharp and bitter in taste and is thereby
found to be hot and dry a singular herb for all inward wounds exulcerated
lungs or other parts. Being drank in a short time it eases all griping
pains windy and choleric humours in the stomach spleen or belly helps the
yellow jaundice by opening the stoppings of the gall and liver and
melancholy by opening the stoppings of the spleen expels venom or poison
and also the plague it provokes urine and women's courses.
It is called Alisander Horse-parsley and Wild-parsley and the Black
Pot-herb the seed of it is that which is usually sold in apothecaries shops
for Macedonian Parsley-seed. It is usually sown in all the gardens in
Europe and so well known that it needs no farther description. It flowers
in June and July the seed is ripe in August. It is an herb of Jupiter and
therefore friendly to nature for it warms a cold stomach and opens a
stoppage of the liver and spleen it is good to move women's courses to
expel the after-birth to break wind to provoke urine and helps the
stranguary.

This tree seldom grows to any great bigness but for the most part abideth
like a hedge-bush or a tree spreading its branches the wood of the body
being white and a dark red colet or heart the outward bark is of a
blackish colour with many whitish spots therein. The leaves are somewhat
like those of an ordinary Alder-tree. It is a tree of Venus and perhaps
under the celestial sign Cancer the inner yellow bark hereof purges
downwards both choler and phlegm and the watery humours of such that have
the dropsy and strengthens the inward parts again by binding. It purges and
strengthens the liver and spleen cleansing them from such evil humours and
hardness as they are afflicted with.
This grows to a reasonable height and spreads much if it like the place it
is so generally known to country people that I conceive it needless to
tell that which is no news. It delights to grow in moist woods and watery
places flowering in April or May. It is a tree under the dominion of Venus
and of some watery sign or others I suppose Pisces and therefore the
decoction or distilled water of the leaves is excellent against burnings
and inflammations either with wounds or without to bathe the place grieved
with. The leaves and bark of the Alder-tree are cooling drying and
binding. The fresh leaves laid upon swellings dissolve them and stay the
inflammation.

To write a discription of that which is so well known to be growing
almost in every garden I suppose is altogether needless yet for its virtue
it is of admirable use. It is an herb of the Sun in Leo let it be gathered
when he is there the Moon applying to his good aspect. In all epidemical
diseases caused by Saturn that is as good a preservative as grows it
resists poison by defending and comforting the heart blood and spirits it
doth the like against the plague and all epidemical diseases. It helps
digestion and is a remedy for a surfeit the juice or the water being
dropped into the eyes or ears helps dimness of sight and deafness.
Besides its common name by which it is best known by the florists of our
days it is called Flower Gentle Flower Velure Floramor and Velvet Flower.
It runs up with a stalk a cubit high streaked and somewhat reddish towards
the root but very smooth divided towards the top with small branches among
which stand long broad leaves of a reddish green colour slippery the
flowers are not properly flowers but tuffs very beautiful to behold but of
no smell. It is under the dominion of Saturn and is an excellent qualifier
of the unruly actions and passions of Venus. The flowers dried and beaten
into powder stop the terms in women and so do almost all other red things.
The flowers stop all fluxes of blood whether in man or woman bleeding
either at the nose or wound.

Called also Wind flower because they say the flowers never open but when
the wind blows. It is under the dominion of Mars being supposed to be a
kind of Crow-foot the leaves provoke the terms mightily being boiled and
the decoction drank. The body being bathed with the decoction of them
cures the leprosy.
This is also called Orage and Garden Arrach. The garden kind is most used
in physic but the wild kind serves indifferently for the same purposes.
The garden Arrach grows up usually but with one stalk divided into
several branches. The leaves are somewhat triangular fastened to long
foot-stalks. The flowers grow at the tops in long bunches gaping like
little hoods which afterwards turn into seed. It is under the
government of Venus. It is good for old swellings of the throat called
the king's evil. It helps the gout and pains in the hips.

It groweth as the other kinds do but the leaves are smaller and of a
dusty mealy colour and so are the stalks too. It groweth wild in
fields and waste grounds. This is of the same nature as the rest only
weaker.

This plant has many names with apothecaries Lamium it is called also
Archangel. They differ not much in form from common Nettles only this
herb has no prickles but stings not at all. The leaves are not so deeply
indented as common Nettles. The flowers are white or red and grow about
the joints. It is under the dominion of Venus. The chiefest use is to
dissolve the congealed blood caused by bruises or falls. The flowers are
preserved or conserved to be used in winter for those purposes mentioned.

This is one of those plants whose names are so disagreed upon by
authors that I have neither time nor list to name them. It groweth low
near the ground with stalks full of joints somewhat reddish where the
leaves grow forth. It groweth common almost everywhere. It is under the
dominion of Saturn. It is used to stay bleeding in any part of the body
and also other fluxes of blood and helps all old ulcers.

This herb hath many small hollow leaves cut in upon the edges somewhat
resembling those of garden chervil. It usually grows about old buildings
walls and in shady places. It is under the dominion of Saturn. The juice
or decoction taken inwardly cools and clears the blood from corrupt
humours and helps the yellow jaundice and the spreading tetters or ringworms.
The asparagus when it first comes up in the spring and is tender is
generally esteemed wholesome and nourishing. The decoction of the root
boiled in wine and drank is good to open obstructions of the liver and
spleen and helps the yellow jaundice the gout the gravel and the
difficulty of urine. It is under the dominion of Jupiter.

This tree is so well known that it needs no description being found in
every hedgerow throughout the land. The leaves are good against the
biting of serpents and against the stinging of the scorpion and the
shrew mouse. They also draw forth thorns and splinters of wood out of
the flesh. The bark is of a binding drying quality used to stay fluxes.
The decoction of the leaves in wine prevails against pains in the sides
and proceeds from wind and gripings of the belly.

This grows wild in many places and is also planted in gardens. It is
under the government of Jupiter. The leaves and roots boiled and
applied as a poultice take away black and blue marks. The decoction
drank cleanses the blood and is good for those who are bursten and have
a rupture and helps stitches and pains in the sides proceeding from
wind. It is good for those who are bruised by falls and also stays
inward bleeding.

This is the herb that bees love best and therefore it is called Bee's
Balm. It grows up with a square stalk and large leaves like Nettles but
soft and woolly without stinging. It groweth in gardens being cultivated
there for its sweet smell. It is an herb of Jupiter under Cancer. Balm
is good to comfort the heart and to drive away melancholy and sadness
taken either in wine or made into a conserve with sugar. It helps
digestion and opens the stoppings of the brain. It is good against
biting of mad dogs and venomous beasts and helps the toothache.

This is so well known that it needs little description for every
country can speak of the barberry tree being almost in every hedge. The
berries are red and sour with little stones in them and are used in
sauces and for preserving. The bark of the root infused in white wine
helps the jaundice. The fruit takes away the heat of fevers and
sharpens appetite and stays vomiting.
